The year 1789 witnessed two far-reaching events: the beginning of a new United States of America and the beginning of the French Revolution. Compared with the American Revolution, the French Revolution was more complex and more radical. The French Revolution established both a new political order and a new social order. For that reason, it is considered a turning point in European history. Background to the Revolution The Third Estate, the vast majority of the French people, was heavily taxed and discontented.HISTORY & YOU What if you had no say in family concerns despite doing all the household chores? Learn how the French people reacted to having no say in their government.French society had changed little since medieval times. Feudal-ism  established  the  privileges  and  obligations  of  the  three  main  social classes. Although there were clergy and wealthy landown-ers in the American colonies, there were no laws giving them spe-cial status, unlike the class system in France. This social injustice caused unrest in eighteenth-century France. France’s Three EstatesSince  the  Middle  Ages,  France’s  population  had  been  divided  by law into one of three status groups, or estates. The First Estate consisted of the clergy, the Second Estate the nobles, and the Third Estate everyone else. Thus the Third Estate included anyone from the lowliest peasant to the wealthiest merchant.The First Estate, or clergy, numbered about 130,000 out of a total population of 27 million and owned about 10 percent of the land. The clergy were radically divided. The higher clergy—cardinals, bishops, and heads of monasteries—were from noble families and shared  their  outlook  and  interests.  The  parish  priests  were  often  poor and from the class of commoners.The  Second  Estate,  or  nobility,  numbered  about  350,000  and  owned  about  25  to  30  percent  of  the  land.  They  played  a  crucial  role  in  society  in  the  1700s.  They  held  leading  positions  in  the  government, in the military, in the law courts, and in the Roman Catholic  Church.  Despite  controlling  most  of  the  wealth  of  the  kingdom,  neither  the  clergy  nor  the  nobles  had  to  pay  the  taille(TAH•yuh), France’s chief tax.

Unlike the First and Second Estates, the Third  Estate  was  divided  by  vast  differ-ences  in  occupation,  level  of  education,  and  wealth.  Peasants  made  up  75  to  80  percent  of  the  Third  Estate  and  owned  about 35 to 40 percent of the land; middle-class  members  of  the  Third  Estate  owned  the  rest.  At  least  half  of  the  peasants  had  little or no land to live on.All  peasants  owed  certain  duties  to  the  nobles, which were a holdover from medi-eval times when serfdom was widespread. For example, a peasant had to pay a fee to grind his flour or press his grapes because the local lord controlled the flour mill and wine  press.  When  the  harvest  time  came,  the  peasant  had  to  work  a  certain  number  of  days  harvesting  the  noble’s  crop.  Peas-ants fiercely resented these duties.Another  part  of  the  Third  Estate  con-sisted of urban craftspeople, shopkeepers, and  workers.  These  people,  too,  were  struggling  to  survive.  In  the  1700s,  the  price  of  consumer  goods  increased  much  faster  than  wages,  which  left  these  urban  groups  with  decreased  buying  power. 

The struggle for survival led many of these people  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  revolution, especially in Paris.The bourgeoisie  (burzh•wah•ZEE),  or  middle class, was another part of the Third Estate.  This  group  included  about  8  per-cent of the population, or 2.3 million peo-ple. They owned about 20 to 25 percent of the  land.  The  bourgeoisie  included  mer-chants, bankers, and industrialists, as well as  professional  people—lawyers,  holders  of public offices, doctors, and writers.The middle class was unhappy with the privileges  held  by  nobles.  They  did  not  want  to  abolish  the  nobility,  however,  but  to  better  their  own  position.  Some  bour-geoisie had managed to become nobles by being appointed to public offices that con-ferred noble status. About 6,500 new nobles had  been  created  by  appointment  during  the 1700s.The  bourgeoisie  also  shared  certain  goals with the nobles. Both were drawn to the  new  political  ideas  of  the  Enlighten-ment.  In  addition,  both  groups  were  increasingly upset with a monarchical sys-tem  resting  on  privileges  and  on  an  old  and  rigid  social  order.  The  opposition  of  these  elites  to  the  old  order  led  them  to  take  drastic  action  against  the  absolute  monarchy of Louis XVI.Financial Crisis Social  conditions,  then,  formed  a  long-standing  background  to  the  French  Revo-lution.   The   immediate   cause   of   the   revolution  was  the  near  collapse  of  the  French budget. Although the economy had been expanding for fifty years, there were periodic  crises.  Bad  harvests  in  1787  and  1788  and  a  slowdown  in  manufacturing  led to food shortages, rising prices for food, and  unemployment.  One  English  traveler  commented   on   the   misery   of   French   peasants:PRIMARY SOURCE “All the country girls and women are without shoes  or  stockings;  and  the  plowmen  at  their  work  have  neither  shoes  nor  stockings  to  their  feet.  This  is  a  poverty  that  strikes  at  the  root  of  national prosperity.”—an English traveler in FranceOn the eve of the revolution, the French economy was in crisis. Despite these prob-lems,  the  French  king  and  his  ministers  continued  to  spend  enormous  sums  of  money  on  wars  and  court  luxuries.  The  queen,  Marie  Antoinette,  was  especially  known  for  her  extravagance  and  this  too  caused popular resentment. When the gov-ernment  decided  to  spend  huge  sums  to  help  the  American  colonists  against  Brit-ain, the budget went into total crisis.With France on the verge of financial col-lapse, Louis XVI was forced to call a meet-ing of the Estates-General, repre sentatives of  all  three  estates  meeting  together,  to  raise  new  taxes.  The  Estates-General  had  not  met  since  1614  because  French  kings  were so powerful.


Louis XVI called a meeting of the Estates-General at Versailles on May 5, 1789. In the Estates-General,  the  First  and  Second  Estates each had about 300 representatives. The  Third  Estate  had  almost  600  repre-sentatives. Most of the Third Estate wanted to set up a constitutional government that would  make  the  clergy  and  nobility  pay  taxes, too.From  the  start,  there  were  arguments  about  voting.  Traditionally,  each  estate  had   one   vote—the   First   and   Second   Estates  could  outvote  the  Third  Estate  two  to  one.  The  Third  Estate  demanded  instead  that  each  deputy  have  one  vote.  Under this new system, with the help of a few  nobles  and  clerics,  the  Third  Estate  would then have a majority vote. The king stated that he favored the current system.On  June  17,  1789,  the  Third  Estate  boldly  declared  that  it  was  the  National  Assembly and would draft a constitution. Three days later, on June 20, its deputies arrived  at  their  meeting  place,  only  to  find  the  doors  had  been  locked.  They  then  moved  to  a  nearby  indoor  tennis  court and swore that they would continue meeting  until  they  had  a  new  constitu-tion. The oath they swore is known as the Tennis Court Oath.Bailly, the National Assembly’s president, led the Tennis Court Oath.Some clergy and nobles joined in the Oath.When the 600 delegates were locked out of Versailles, they walked to a nearby tennis court where they swore to meet until they had a constitution.

Louis XVI prepared to use force against the  Third  Estate.  On  July  14,  1789,  about  900 Parisians gathered in the courtyard of the  Bastille  (ba•STEEL)—an  old  fortress,  used as a prison and armory. The price of bread  had  reached  record  highs  so  the  crowd  was  hungry  and  agitated.  Accord-ing to rumor, the king’s troops were com-ing,  and  there  was  ammunition  in  the  Bastille.  A  group  of  attackers  managed  to  lower the two drawbridges over the moat. Members  of  the  French  Guard  joined  the  attack.  After  four  hours  of  fighting,  the  prison  warden  surrendered.  The  rebels  released  the  seven  prisoners  and  cut  off  the  prison  warden’s  head.  Angered  that  there were no munitions, the crowd demol-ished the Bastille brick by brick. Paris was abandoned to the rebels.When  King  Louis  XVI  returned  to  his  palace at Versailles after a day of hunting, the  duc  de  la  Rochefoucauld-Liancourt  told him about the fall of the Bastille. Louis is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  “Why,  this  is  a  revolt.” “No, Sire,” replied the duke. “It is a revolution.”Louis  XVI  was  informed  that  he  could  no longer trust royal troops to shoot at the mob. The king’s authority had collapsed in Paris.  Meanwhile,  all  over  France,  revolts  were  breaking  out.  Popular  hatred  of  the  entire  landholding  system,  with  its  fees  and  obligations,  had  finally  spilled  over  into action.Peasant  rebellions  became  part  of  the  vast  panic  known  as  the  Great  Fear.  The  peasants  feared  that  the  work  of  the  National  Assembly  would  be  stopped  by  foreign  armies.  Rumors  spread  from  vil-lage to village that foreign troops were on the  way  to  put  down  the  revolution.  The  peasants  reacted  by  breaking  into  the  houses  of  the  lords  to  destroy  the  records  of their obligations

The  National  Assembly  reacted  to  news  of peasant rebellions and rumors of a possi-ble foreign invasion. On August 4, 1789, the National  Assembly  decided  to  abolish  all  legal privileges of the nobles and clergy.Declaration of the Rights of ManOn  August  26,  the  National  Assembly  adopted  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man and the Citizen. Inspired by the Eng-lish Bill of Rights of 1689 and by the Amer-ican  Declaration  of  Independence  and  Constitution,  this  charter  of  basic  liberties  began with “the natural and imprescripti-ble  rights  of  man”  to  “liberty,  property,  security, and resistance to oppression.”Reflecting  Enlightenment  thought,  the  declaration  proclaimed  that  all  men  were  free and equal before the law, that appoint-ment  to  public  office  should  be  based  on  talent, and that no group should be exempt from  taxation.  Freedom  of  speech  and  of  the press were affirmed.The declaration raised an important issue. Should equal rights include women? Many deputies agreed, provided that, as one man said, “women do not hope to exercise politi-cal  rights  and  functions.”  One  writer,  Olympe  de  Gouges,  refused  to  accept  this  exclusion of women. Echoing the words of the official declaration, she wrote:PRIMARY SOURCE”Believing  that  ignorance,  omission,  or  scorn  for  the  rights  of  woman  are  the  only  causes  of  public  misfortunes  and  of  the  corruption  of  governments,  the  women  have  resolved  to  set  forth  in  a  solemn  declaration  the  natural,  inalienable, and sacred rights of woman in order that  this  declaration,  constantly  exposed  before  all  the  members  of  the  society,  will  ceaselessly  remind them of their rights and duties.”— from Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Woman  and  the Female Citizen, Olympe de Gouges, 1791The King Concedes In the meantime, Louis XVI remained at Versailles.  Used  to  the  absolutist  system,  he   stubbornly   refused   to   accept   the   National Assembly’s decrees. On October 5,   however,   thousands   of   Parisian   women—described  by  an  eyewitness  as  “detachments of women coming up from every direction, armed with broomsticks, lances,  pitchforks,  swords,  pistols  and  muskets”—marched  to  Versailles.  Some  of  the  women  then  met  with  the  king.  They  told  him  that  their  children  were  starving  because  there  was  no  bread.  These  women  forced  Louis  to  accept  the  new decrees.Now  the  crowd  insisted  that  the  king  and his family come to Paris to show sup-port for the National Assembly. If the king was  not  under  their  close  watch,  they  feared  he  would  rouse  the  kings  and  princes  from  other  countries  to  oppose  reform.On  October  6,  the  king  and  his  family  returned  to  Paris.  As  a  goodwill  gesture,  they brought wagonloads of flour from the palace  storehouse.  They  were  escorted  by  women  who  chanted:  “We  are  bringing  back  the  baker,  the  baker’s  wife,  and  the  baker’s  boy.”  The  king,  the  queen,  and  their  son  were  now  virtual  prisoners  in Paris.Church ReformsUnder  the  old  regime,  the  Catholic  Church had been an important pillar of the social and political system. The revolution-aries felt they had to reform it too. The new revolutionary  government  had  another  serious motivation, however: the need for money.  By  seizing  and  selling  off  Church  lands,  the  National  Assembly  was  able  to  increase the state’s revenues.Finally, the Church was formally brought under  the  control  of  the  state.  A  law  was  passed called the Civil Constitution of the Clergy.  It  said  that  bishops  and  priests  were  to  be  elected  by  the  people,  not  appointed  by  the  pope  and  the  Church  hierarchy.  The  state  would  also  pay  the  salaries of the bishops and priests. Because of  these  changes,  many  Catholics  became  enemies of the revolution.

New Constitution and New FearsThe  new  Constitution  of  1791  set  up  a  limited  monarchy.  There  was  still  a  king,  but  a  Legislative  Assembly  would  make  the  laws.  The  new  body  was  designed  to  be  conservative.  First,  only  the  so-called  “active” citizens—men over 25 who paid a certain  amount  of  taxes—could  vote.  All  others  were  considered  “passive”  citizens  with equal rights but no vote. Second, the method of choosing its 745 deputies meant that only relatively wealthy people would serve. Not only the clergy, but also govern-ment officials and judges, would be elected. Local  governments  were  put  in  charge  of  taxation. The influence of the new govern-ment began to spread throughout France.By  1791,  the  “ancien  régime,”  or  old  order,  had  been  destroyed,  but  the  newgovernment  did  not  have  universal  sup-port.  Political  radicals  and  economically  disadvantaged   people   wanted   more   reform. The king detested the new govern-ment’s  regulation  of  the  Church  and  his  loss of absolute power. While Louis resisted the new constitution, family members and advisers urged him to take more action. In June 1791, the royal family attempted to flee France in disguise. They almost suc-ceeded  in  reaching  allies  in  the  east,  but  they  were  recognized  and  were  captured  at  Varennes  and  brought  back  to  Paris.  In  this  unsettled  situation,  the  new  Legisla-tive  Assembly  met  for  the  first  time  in  October  1791  and  amended  the  constitu-tion to allow for trying the king if he turned against  the  nation.  Although  Louis  XVI  publicly  swore  to  uphold  the  new  consti-tution, the constitutional monarchy seemed already doomed.

War with Austria Over  time,  some  European  leaders  began  to  fear  that  revolution would spread to their countries. The rulers of Austria  and  Prussia  even  threatened  to  use  force  to  restore  Louis  XVI  to  full  power.  Insulted  by  this  threat  and fearing attack, the Legislative Assembly decided to strike  first,  declaring  war  on  Austria  in  the  spring  of  1792.  The  French  fared  badly  in  the  initial  fighting.  A  frantic  search  for  scapegoats  began.  One  observer  in  France noted:

Rise of the Paris Commune In  the  spring  of  1792,  angry  citizens  demonstrated  to  protest food shortages and defeats in the war. In August, Paris  radicals  again  decided  the  fate  of  the  revolution.  They  declared  themselves  a  commune—a  popularly  run  city  council—and  organized  a  mob  attack  on  the  royal  palace and Legislative Assembly.The French Revolution was entering a more radical and violent  stage.  Members  of  the  new  Paris  Commune  took  the king captive. They forced the Legislative Assembly to suspend the monarchy and to call for a National Conven-tion. This time they wanted a more radical change. All the representatives  who  would  decide  the  nation’s  future  would  be  elected  through  universal  male  suffrage,  in  which  all  adult  males  had  the  right  to  vote.  This  would  broaden  the  group  of  voters  to  include  men  who  did  not  meet  the  initial  standards  for  citizenship  established  by  the Assembly.Many  members  of  the  Paris  Commune  proudly  called  themselves sans-culottes,  meaning  “without  breeches.”  They wore long trousers, not the knee-length breeches of the  nobles,  which  identified  them  as  ordinary  patriots  without  fine  clothes.  Often,  sans-culottes  are  depicted  as  poor workers, but many were merchants or artisans—the elite of their neighborhoods. The revolution was entering a more radical phase because of the threat of foreign inter-vention to reestablish the monarchy and because economic conditions in France showed little improvement. This led to calls for new measures to be taken to secure the future of the revolution and improve the living conditions of the people in France

Radical Revolution and ReactionJust as in the American Revolution, participants in the French Revolution had different ideas about how to carry out revolutionary ideas and achieve their goals. The revolution tore France’s political, economic, and social structure apart, which made neighboring countries nervous. The French Revolution became more radical because of internal divisions and because of fear of foreign invasion

After his flight to Varennes, Louis XVI remained on the throne for a year, but it was a chaotic year. Unrest was fueled by continu-ing  food  shortages,  military  setbacks,  and  rumors  of  royalist  conspir acies. By August of 1792, the monarchy was over. Rallied by the newly appointed minister of justice, Georges Danton, the sans-culottes attacked the palace, and the royal family had to seek protection from the Legislative Assembly. The powerful Paris Commune forced the Legislative Assembly to call a National Convention. Before the Convention could meet, panic  and  fear  again  gripped  Paris.  Rumors  spread  that  impris-oned nobles and other traitors were conspiring to defeat the revo-lution.  Violence  erupted  in  the  streets  in  September,  leaving  thousands  dead.  New  leaders  of  the  people  emerged,  including  Jean-Paul Marat, who published a radical journal called Friend of the People. Marat defended the September massacres. Soon the life of the king was at risk. The buildup to his execu-tion began with the elections for a new National Convention.The First RepublicIn  September  1792,  the  newly  elected  National  Convention  began  meeting.  The  Convention  had  been  called  to  draft  a  new  constitution, but it also served as the ruling body of France. It was dominated by lawyers, professionals, and property owners. Two-thirds of its deputies were under the age of 45, but most had some political  experience  as  a  result  of  the  revolution.  Almost  all  dis-trusted  the  king.  It  was  therefore  no  surprise  that  the  National  Convention’s first major step on September 21 was to abolish the monarchy and establish a republic, the French Republic.

The Fate of the KingAfter  1789,  citizens  had  enthusiastically  formed political clubs of varying social and political  views.  Many  deputies  belonged  to  these  clubs.  The  Girondins  (juh•RAHN•duhns)  tended  to  represent  areas  outside  Paris. They feared the radical mobs of Parisand  leaned  toward  keeping  the  king  alive.  The  Mountain  represented  the  interests  of  radicals in Paris, and many belonged to the Jacobins  (JA•kuh•buhns)  club.  Increas-ingly  they  felt  the  king  needed  to  be  exe-cuted to ensure he was not a rallying point for opponents of the republic.  Both factions,  or  dissenting  groups,  tried to influence the “plain,” the major-ity of deputies who did not belong to anypolitical  club.  In  early  1793,  the  Moun-tain convinced the Convention to pass a decree  condemning  Louis  XVI  to  death. 

On January 21, the king was beheaded on the guillotine. Revolutionaries had adopted this machine because it killed quickly and, they believed, humanely. The king’s execu-tion  created  new  enemies  for  the  revolu-tion, both at home and abroad. A new crisis was at hand.The execution of King Louis XVI pushed the  revolution  into  a  new  radical  phase.  Henry  de  Firmont,  a  Catholic  priest,  was  present at the king’s execution. He describes the events he witnessed: PRIMARY SOURCE“The path leading to the scaffold was extremely rough and difficult to pass; the King was obliged to  lean  on  my  arm,  and  from  the  slowness  with  which  he  proceeded,  I  feared  for  a  moment  that  his  courage  might  fail;  but  what  was  my  astonishment,  when  arrived  at  the  last  step,  he  suddenly  let  go  of  my  arm,  and  I  saw  him  cross  with a firm foot the breadth of the whole scaffold; and  in  a  loud  voice,  I  heard  him  pronounce  distinctly  these  words:  ‘I  die  innocent  of  all  the  crimes laid to my charge; I pardon those who had occasioned my death; and I pray to God that the blood you are going to shed may never be visited on France.’” —Henry de FirmontCrises and ResponsesDisputes between the Girondins and the Mountain  blocked  the  writing  of  a  consti-tution.  The  Paris  Commune  pressured  the  National Convention to adopt more radical measures:  price  controls  on  food  and  uni-versal  male  suffrage.  Peasants  in  western  France and inhabitants of major provincial cities refused to accept the authority of the Convention.  Uprisings  began  in  the  west  and spread to the south. After  Louis  XVI  was  executed,  a  coali-tion  of  Austria,  Prussia,  Spain,  Portugal,  Britain,  and  the  Dutch  Republic  took  up  arms  against  France.  The  French  armies  began to fall back. By late spring 1793, the coalition  was  poised  to  invade.  It  seemed  possible  that  the  revolution  would  be  destroyed,  and  the  old  regime  reestab-lished.  Confronted  with  domestic  upris-ings  and  external  threats,  the  National  Convention gave the Committee of Public Safety broad powers. This was dominated by  Georges  Danton,  then  by  the  radical  Jacobin Maximilien Robespierre

For roughly a year during 1793 and 1794, the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  took  con-trol  of  the  government.  To  defend  France  from  domestic  threats,  the  Committee  adopted policies that became known as the Reign of Terror.Crushing RebellionAs  a  temporary  measure,  revolutionary  courts  were  set  up  to  prosecute  counter-revolutionaries  and  traitors.  Throughout  France,  almost  40,000  people  were  killed  during the Reign of Terror. Of those, 16,000 people,  including  Marie  Antoinette  and  Olympe de Gouges, died by the guillotine. Most executions occurred in towns that had openly rebelled against the Convention.Revolutionary  armies  were  set  up  to  bring rebellious cities under the control of the National Convention. When the Com-mittee of Public Safety decided to make an example of Lyon, 1,880 citizens of that city were  executed.  When  guillotining  proved  too slow, grapeshot (a cluster of small iron balls)  was  used  to  shoot  the  condemned  into open graves. A foreign witness wrote:PRIMARY SOURCE“Whole  ranges  of  houses,  always  the  most  handsome, burnt. The churches, convents, and all the  dwellings  of  the  former  patricians  were  in  ruins. When I came to the guillotine, the blood of those  who  had  been  executed  a  few  hours  beforehand  was  still  running  in  the  street.  .  .  .  I  said to a group of sans-culottes that it would be decent  to  clear  away  all  this  human  blood.  Why  should it be cleared? one of them said to me. It’s the  blood  of  aristocrats  and  rebels.  The  dogs  should lick it up.”—a German observer at Lyon, 1793In  western  France,  too,  revolutionary  armies were brutal in defeating rebels. The commander  of  the  revolutionary  army  ordered that no mercy be given: “The road is  strewn  with  corpses.  Women,  priests,  monks, children, all have been put to death. I  have  spared  nobody.”  Perhaps  the  most  notorious  violence  occurred  in  Nantes,  where  victims  were  executed  by  being  sunk in barges in the Loire River.People from all classes were killed during the Terror. Clergy and nobles made up about 15 percent of the victims, while the rest were from  the  Third  Estate.  The  Committee  of  Public Safety held that all this bloodletting was  only  temporary.  Once  the  war  and  domestic crisis were over, the true “Repub-lic of Virtue” would follow, and the Decla-ration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen would be realized. Robespierre wrote:PRIMARY SOURCE“.  .  .  [T]he  springs  of  popular  government  in  revolution  are  at  once  virtue  and  terror:  virtue,  without which terror is fatal; terror, without which virtue  is  powerless.  Terror  is  nothing  other  than  justice,  prompt,  severe,  inflexible;  it  is  therefore  an emanation of virtue.”—RobespierreThe Republic of VirtueIn addition to the Terror, the Committee of Public Safety took other steps to control and  shape  a  French  society.  Robespierre  called  this  new  order  the  Republic  of  Vir-tue—a  democratic  republic  composed  of  good citizens. As outward signs of support for  the  republic,  the  titles  “citizen”  and  “citizeness”  were  to  replace  “mister”  and  “madame.”  Women  wore  long  dresses  inspired by the clothing worn in the ancient Roman Republic.Good citizens would be formed by good education. A law aimed at primary educa-tion  for  all  was  passed  but  not  widely  implemented. Another law abolished slav-ery in French colonies.Because people were alarmed about high inflation,  the  Committee  tried  to  control  the prices of essential goods like food, fuel, and  clothing.  The  controls  did  not  work  well,  however,  because  the  government  had no way to enforce them. From  the  beginning,  women  had  been  active   participants   in   the   revolution,   although  they  had  no  official  power.

During the radical stage of the revolution, women  observed  sessions  of  the  National  Convention and were not shy about mak-ing their demands. In 1793, two women founded the Society for  Revolutionary  Republican  Women  in  Paris.  Most  members  were  working-class  women who asserted that they were ready to  defend  the  republic.  Most  men,  how-ever, believed that women should not par-ticipate in either politics or the military.The Convention also pursued a policy of de-Christianization.  Its  members  believed  that  the  religion  encouraged  superstition,  rather  than  the  use  of  reason.  The  word  saint  was  removed  from  street  names,  churches  were  looted  and  closed  by  revo-lutionary armies, and priests were encour-aged  to  marry.  In  Paris,  the  cathedral  of  Notre Dame, the center of the Catholic reli-gion  in  France,  was  designated  a  “temple  of  reason.”  In  November  1793,  a  public  ceremony dedicated to the worship of rea-son was held in the former cathedral. Patri-otic  young  girls  dressed  in  white  dresses  paraded  before  a  temple  of  reason  where  the high altar had once stood.Another  example  of  de-Christianization  was the adoption of a new calendar. Years would  no  longer  be  numbered  from  the  birth  of  Christ  but  from  September  22,  1792—the first day of the French Republic and  the  autumnal  equinox.  The  calendar  contained  12  months.  Each  month  con-sisted of three 10-day weeks, with the tenth day of each week a day of rest. The months were given new names that referred to agriculture or the climate. Ven-démiaire, which started in September, meant “vintage  time.”  These  changes  in  the  cal-endar had a significant effect on religion in France, eliminating Sundays, Sunday wor-ship services, and church holidays.Robespierre  came  to  realize,  however,  that most French people would not accept these efforts at de-Christianization. France was still overwhelmingly Catholic

As foreign troops gathered on its borders, the  revolution  seemed  to  be  in  danger.  To  save the republic, the Committee of Public Safety issued a decree to raise an army: PRIMARY SOURCE  “Young  men  will  fight,  young  men  are  called  to conquer. Married men will forge arms, transport military baggage and guns and will prepare food supplies.  Women,  who  at  long  last  are  to  take  their  rightful  place  in  the  revolution  and  follow  their  true  destiny,  will  forget  their  futile  tasks:  their  delicate  hands  will  work  at  making  clothes  for  soldiers;  they  will  make  tents  and  they  will  extend  their  tender  care  to  shelters  where  the  defenders  of  the  Patrie  [homeland]  will  receive  the  help  that  their  wounds  require.  Children  will  make lint of old cloth. It is for them that we are fighting: children, those beings destined to gather all the fruits of the revolution, will raise their pure hands toward the skies. And old men, performing their missions again, as of yore, will be guided to the  public  squares  of  the  cities  where  they  will  kindle the courage of young warriors and preach the  doctrines  of  hate  for  kings  and  the  unity  of  the Republic.”—from the mobilization decree, August 23, 1793Rise of the Revolutionary ArmyIn less than a year, the new French gov-ernment had raised a huge army—by Sep-tember 1794, it had over a million soldiers. It was the largest army ever seen in Europe, and it pushed the invaders back across the Rhine.  It  even  conquered  the  Austrian  Netherlands.  In  earlier  times,  wars  were  the  business  of  rulers  who  fought  rivals  with professional soldiers. The new French army  was  created  by  a  people’s  govern-ment. Its wars were people’s wars.

End of the TerrorBy  the  summer  of  1794,  the  French  had  largely  defeated  their  foreign  foes.  There  was less need for the Reign of Terror, but it continued  nonetheless.  Robespierre  was  obsessed  with  ridding  France  of  all  the  corrupt  elements.  Only  then  could  the  Republic of Virtue follow. In June 1794, the Law of 22 Prairial was passed,  which  gave  Robespierre  more  power to arrest and execute enemies of the revolution.   Deputies   in   the   National   Convention   who   feared   Robespierre   decided  to  act,  lest  they  be  the  next  vic-tims.  They  gathered  enough  votes  to  con-demn him, and Robespierre was guillotined on July 28, 1794.After the death of Robespierre, the Jaco-bins   lost   power   and   more   moderate   middle-class  leaders  took  control.  The  Reign  of  Terror  came  to  a  halt.  In  August  1794,  the  Law  of  22  Prairial  was  repealed  and the release of prisoners began.

he DirectoryThe Constitution of 1795 set up a new government, but it was unable to inspire trust or solve economic problems.HISTORY & YOU What kind of government did Americans have after 1781? Read to learn about France’s government after Robespierre. With the Terror over, the National Convention moved in a more conservative direction. First, it restricted the power of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety.  Next,  churches  were  allowed  to  reopen.  Finally,  a  new  constitution  was  created.To  keep  any  one  political  group  from  gaining  control,  the  Constitution  of  1795  set  up  two  legislative  houses.  A  lower  house,  the  Council  of  500,  drafted  laws.  An  upper  house  of  250,  the  Council  of  Elders,  accepted  or  rejected  proposed laws.The  method  for  election  shows  that  the  new  govern-ment  was  much  more  conservative  than  the  government  of  Robespierre.  Members  of  both  houses  were  chosen  by  electors,  or  qualified  voters.  Only  those  who  owned  or  rented  property  worth  a  certain  amount  could  be  elec-tors—only  30,000  people  in  the  whole  nation  qualified.  This was a significant change from the universal male suf-frage the Paris Commune had demanded.Under  the  new  constitution,  the  executive  was  a  com-mittee  of  five  called  the  Directory.  The  Council  of  Elders  chose the Directors from a list presented by the Council of 500. The Directory, which lasted from 1795 to 1799, became known  mainly  for  corruption.  People  reacted  against  the  sufferings  and  sacrifices  that  had  been  demanded  in  the  Reign of Terror. Some people made fortunes from govern-ment  contracts  or  by  loaning  the  government  money  at  very high interest rates. They took advantage of the gov-ernment’s  severe  money  problems  during  these  difficult  times.At the same time, the government of the Directory faced political  enemies  from  both  conservatives  and  radicals.  Some  people  wanted  to  bring  back  the  monarchy,  while  others  plotted  to  create  a  more  radical  regime  like  Robe-spierre’s. Likewise, economic problems continued with no solution  in  sight.  Finally,  France  was  still  conducting  expensive wars against foreign enemies.To stay in power, the Directory began to rely on the mili-tary,  but  one  military  leader  turned  on  the  government.  In  1799  the  successful  and  popular  general  Napoleon  Bonaparte  toppled  the  Directory  in  a  coup  d’état  (kooday•TAH),  a  sudden  overthrow  of  the  government.  Napoleon then seized power.


Who Should Be a Citizen?What is a citizen? One definition is a free person who owes loyalty to a nation and who receives protection, rights, and privileges in return.Who should be a citizen? At the time of the American Revolution only free, white adult males who owned property or paid taxes could vote. By 1870, all adult males “regardless of race, color, or previous condition of servitude” were granted the right to vote, but it was 1920 before American women could vote.In France, the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen addressed social distinctions, but opinions differed on how to interpret the document. Read the excerpts from Robespierre and d’Aelders and study Fragonard’s painting to see how they viewed citizenship and the continuing struggle for rights.SOURCE 1In this speech from October 1789, Maximilien Robespierre stated his view on property requirements for holding office and voting.All citizens, whoever they are, have the right to aspire to all levels of office-holding. Nothing is more in line with your declaration of rights, according  to  which  all  privileges,  all  distinc-tions,  all  exceptions  must  disappear.  The  Constitution   establishes   that   sovereignty1resides  in  the  people,  in  all  the  individuals  of  the  people.  Each  individual  therefore  has  the  right  to  participate  in  making  the  law  which  governs  him  and  in  the  administration  of  the  public  good  which  is  his  own.  If  not,  it  is  not  true that all men are equal in rights, that every man  is  a  citizen.  If  he  who  only  pays  a  tax  equivalent  to  a  day  of  work  has  fewer  rights  than he who pays the equivalent to three days of  work,  and  he  who  pays  at  the  level  of  ten  days  has  more  rights  than  he  whose  tax  only  equals that value of three, then he who enjoys 100,000  livres  [French  pounds]  of  revenue  has  100  times  as  many  rights  as  he  who  only  has  1,000 livres of revenue. It follows from all your decrees2 that every citizen has the right to par-ticipate  in  making  the  law  and  consequently  that  of  being  an  elector  or  eligible  for  office  without the distinction of wealth.1 sovereignty: power; authority2 decrees: authoritative decisions; declarationsSOURCE 2Etta Palm d’Aelders was a woman active in a reform group called the Cercle Social (Social Circle). D’Aelders expressed her opinions in “The Injustices of the Laws and Favor of Men at the Expense of Women” (December, 1790). Do not be just by halves, Gentlemen; . . . jus-tice must be the first virtue of free men, and jus-tice  demands  that  the  laws  be  the  same  for  all  beings, like the air and the sun. And yet every-where,  the  laws  favor  men  at  the  expense  of  women,  because  everywhere  power  is  in  your  hands. What! Will free men, an enlightened peo-ple living in a century of enlightenment and phi-losophy, will they consecrate3 what has been the abuse of power in a century of ignorance? . . .The prejudices with which our sex has been surrounded—supported  by  unjust  laws  which  only accord us a secondary existence in society and  which  often  force  us  into  the  humiliating  necessity  of  winning  over  the  cantankerous4and  ferocious  character  of  a  man,  who,  by  the  greed  of  those  close  to  us  has  become  our  master—those  prejudices  have  changed  what  was  for  us  the  sweetest  and  most  saintly  of  duties, those of wife and mother, into a painful and terrible slavery. . . .Oh! Gentlemen, if you wish us to be enthusi-astic  about  the  happy  constitution  that  gives  back men their rights, then begin by being just toward  us.  From  now  on  we  should  be  your  voluntary companions and not your slaves. Let us merit your attachment!3 consecrate: make sacred4 cantankerous: having a bad disposition; quarrelsome594CHAPTER 18    The French Revolution and Napoleon

On  May  20,  1795,  an  angry  mob  in  the  Convention hacked the head off deputy Feraud and  presented  it  to  the  chairman,  Boissy  d’Anglas,  who  saluted  the  head.  After  this  incident,  d’Anglas  presented  measures  to  prevent the return of the Reign of Terror and to take precautions against anarchy5.Usually the crowds in the balcony were merely rowdy, insulting and threatening the deputies. At times like the one in the painting, they became a mob, invading the chamber and killing deputies with whom they dis-agreed. Some leaders thought the poor and the uneducated would take over the govern-ment, leading to violence and disorder. They feared “mob rule.”

The Age of NapoleonNapoleon Bonaparte dominated French and European history from 1799 to 1815. During his reign Napoleon built and lost an empire and also spread ideas about nationalism in Europe.The Rise of NapoleonNapoleon, a popular general, overthrew the Directory, set up a new government, and eventually took complete power.HISTORY & YOU What qualities do you look for in a political leader? Learn what made the French follow Napoleon.Napoleon  Bonaparte’s  role  in  the  French  Revolution  is  com-plex. In one sense, he brought it to an end when he came to power in 1799. Yet he was a child of the revolution as well. Without it, he would never have risen to power, and he himself never failed to remind the French that he had preserved the best parts of the rev-olution during his reign as emperor. Early LifeNapoleon was born in 1769 in Corsica, an island in the Mediter-ranean,  only  a  few  months  after  France  had  annexed  the  island.  His  father  came  from  minor  nobility  in  Italy,  but  the  family  was  not rich. Napoleon was talented, however, and won a scholarship to a famous military school.When he completed his studies, Napoleon was commissioned as  a  lieutenant  in  the  French  army.  Although  he  became  one  of  the world’s greatest generals and a man beloved by his soldiers, there were few signs of his future success at this stage. He spoke with  an  Italian  accent  and  was  not  popular  with  his  fellow  officers.Napoleon  devoted  himself  to  his  goals.  He  read  what  French  philosophers  had  to  say  about  reason,  and  he  studied  famous  military campaigns. When revolution and war with Europe came about,  there  were  many  opportunities  for  Napoleon  to  use  his  knowledge and skills.Military SuccessesNapoleon rose quickly through the ranks. In 1792 he became a captain. Two years later, at age 24, the Committee of Public Safety made him a brigadier general. In 1796 he became commander of the French armies in Italy. There Napoleon won a series of battles with qualities he became famous for—speed, surprise, and deci-sive action. Napoleon defeated the armies of the Papal States and

their  Austrian  allies.  These  victories  gave  France  control  of  northern  Italy.  Through-out  the  Italian  campaigns,  Napoleon’s  energy and initiative earned him the devo-tion  of  his  troops.  His  keen  intelligence,  ease  with  words,  and  supreme  self-confi-dence  allowed  him  to  win  the  support  of  those around him.In 1797 he returned to France as a hero. He  was  given  command  of  an  army  in  training to invade Britain, but he knew the French  could  not  carry  out  that  invasion.  Instead, Napoleon suggested striking indi-rectly at Britain by taking Egypt. Egypt  lay  on  the  route  to  India,  a  major  source  of  British  wealth  and  therefore  one  of Britain’s most important colonies. Napo-leon’s goal of taking Egypt was never met, however. The British were a great sea power and controlled the Mediterranean. By 1799, the  British  had  defeated  the  French  naval  forces  supporting  Napoleon’s  army  in  Egypt.  Seeing  certain  defeat,  Napoleon  abandoned his army and returned to Paris.

Consul and EmperorIn Paris, Napoleon took part in the coup d’état of 1799 that overthrew the Directory and   set   up   a   new   government,   the   consulate. In theory, it was a republic, but, in  fact,  Napoleon  held  absolute  power.  Napoleon  was  called  first  consul,  a  title  borrowed from ancient Rome. He appointed officials,  controlled  the  army,  conducted  foreign  affairs,  and  influenced  the  legisla-ture.  In  1802  Napoleon  was  made  consul  for  life.  Two  years  later,  he  crowned  him-self Emperor Napoleon I. ✓Reading CheckDescribing What personal qualities gained Napoleon so much popular support?Napoleon’s Domestic PoliciesNapoleon brought stability to France and established a single law code that recognized the equality of all citizens before the law. HISTORY & YOU How would you feel if a govern-ment official checked all your mail before you read it? Read how many of Napoleon’s policies reduced freedom.Napoleon once claimed that he had pre-served the gains of the revolution. Since he destroyed  the  republican  form  of  govern-ment  when  he  took  power,  how  could  Napoleon make this assertion? As we look 

at Napoleon’s domestic policies, it will be possible  to  judge  whether  the  emperor’s  claims had any merit. Peace with the ChurchOne  of  Napoleon’s  first  moves  at  home  was  to  establish  peace  with  the  Catholic  Church,  the  oldest  enemy  of  the  revolu-tion. In matters of religion, Napoleon him-self  was  a  man  of  the  Enlightenment.  He  believed  in  reason  and  felt  that  religion  was  at  most  a  social  convenience.  Since  most  of  the  French  were  Catholic,  Napo-leon  felt  it  was  good  policy  to  mend  rela-tions with the Church.In 1801 Napoleon came to an agreement with  the  pope,  which  recognized  Catholi-cism  as  the  religion  of  a  majority  of  the  French  people.  In  return,  the  pope  would  not  ask  for  the  return  of  the  church  lands  seized in the revolution.With this agreement, the Catholic Church was  no  longer  an  enemy  of  the  French  government.  It  also  meant  that  people  who had acquired church lands in the rev-olution   became   avid   supporters   of   Napoleon.Codification of the LawsNapoleon’s   most   famous   domestic   achievement was to codify the laws. Before the revolution, France had almost 300 dif-ferent  legal  systems.  During  the  revolu-tion, efforts were made to prepare a single law  code  for  the  entire  nation.  However,  the  work  was  not  completed  until  Napo-leon’s reign.Seven  law  codes  were  created,  but  the  most  important  was  the  Civil  Code,  or  Napoleonic  Code,  introduced  in  1804.  It  preserved  many  of  the  principles  that  the  revolutionaries had fought for: equality of all citizens before the law; the right of the individual to choose a profession; religious toleration;  and  the  abolition  of  serfdom  and all feudal obligations.For women and children, the Civil Code was  a  step  back.  During  the  radical  stage  of  the  revolution,  new  laws  had  made  divorce  easier  and  allowed  children,  even  daughters, to inherit property on an equal basis.  The  Civil  Code  undid  these  laws.  Women  were  now  “less  equal  than  men.”  When they married, they lost control over any property they had. They could not tes-tify  in  court,  and  it  became  more  difficult  for  them  to  begin  divorce  proceedings.  In  general, the code treated women like chil-dren, who needed protection and who did not have a public role.A New BureaucracyNapoleon is also well known because he created  a  strong,  centralized  adminis-tration.   He   focused   on   developing   a   bureaucracy of capable officials. Early on, the  regime  showed  that  it  did  not  care  about  rank  or  birth.  Public  officials  and  military officers alike were promoted based on their ability. Opening careers to men of talent  was  a  reform  that  the  middle  class  had clamored for before the revolution.Napoleon also created a new aristocracy based on meritorious service to the nation. Between  1808  and  1814,  Napoleon  created  about 3,200 nobles. Nearly 60 percent were military  officers,  while  the  rest  were  civil  service or state and local officials. Socially, only 22 percent of this new aristocracy were from noble families of the old regime; about 60 percent were middle class in origin.Preserver of the Revolution?In his domestic policies, then, Napoleon did keep some major reforms of the French Revolution. Under the Civil Code, all citi-zens  were  equal  before  the  law.  The  con-cept  of  opening  government  careers  to  more people was another gain of the revo-lution that he retained.On the other hand, Napoleon destroyed some  revolutionary  ideals.  Liberty  was  replaced by a despotism that grew increas-ingly arbitrary, in spite of protests by such citizens  as  the  prominent  writer  Anne-Louise-Germaine de Staël. Napoleon shut down  60  of  France’s  73  newspapers  and  banned  books,  including  de  Staël’s.  He  insisted  that  all  manuscripts  be  subjected  to  government  scrutiny  before  they  were  published.  Even  the  mail  was  opened  by  government police.

Napoleon  is,  of  course,  known  less  for  his  domestic  policies  than  for  his  military  leadership. His conquests began soon after he rose to power.Building the EmpireWhen Napoleon became consul in 1799, France  was  at  war  with  a  European  coali-tion  of  Russia,  Great  Britain,  and  Austria.  Napoleon realized the need for a pause in the war. “The French Revolution is not fin-ished,” he said, “so long as the scourge of war lasts. . . . I want peace, as much to set-tle  the  present  French  government,  as  to  save the world from chaos.” In 1802 a peace treaty was signed, but it did not last long. War  with  Britain  broke  out  again  in  1803.  Gradually,  Britain  was  joined  by  Austria,  Russia, Sweden, and Prussia. In a series of battles at Ulm, Austerlitz, Jena, and Eylau from 1805 to 1807, Napoleon’s Grand Army defeated  the  Austrian,  Prussian,  and  Rus-sian armies.From  1807  to  1812,  Napoleon  was  the  master  of  Europe.  His  Grand  Empire  was  composed of three major parts: the French Empire, dependent states, and allied states. The  French  Empire  was  the  inner  core  of  the  Grand  Empire.  It  consisted  of  an  enlarged France extending to the Rhine in the east and including the western half of Italy north of Rome. Dependent  states  were  kingdoms  ruled  by relatives of Napoleon. Eventually these included  Spain,  Holland,  the  kingdom  of  Italy, the Swiss Republic, the Grand Duchy of  Warsaw,  and  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine—a union of all German states except Austria and Prussia.Allied  states  were  countries  defeated  by  Napoleon and then forced to join his struggle against   Britain.   These   states   included   Prussia, Austria, Russia, and Sweden.Spreading the Principles of the RevolutionWithin  his  empire,  Napoleon  sought  to  spread some of the principles of the French Revolution,  including  legal  equality,  reli-gious toleration, and economic freedom. In the inner core and dependent states of his Grand  Empire,  Napoleon  tried  to  destroy  the  old  order.  The  nobility  and  the  clergy  everywhere  in  these  states  lost  their  spe-cial privileges. Napoleon decreed equality of  opportunity  with  offices  open  to  those  with  ability,  equality  before  the  law,  and  religious  toleration.  The  spread  of  French  revolutionary principles was an important factor in the development of liberal tradi-tions in these countries.Like  Hitler  130  years  later,  Napoleon  hoped  that  his  Grand  Empire  would  last  for  centuries,  but  his  empire  collapsed  almost  as  rapidly  as  it  was  formed.  Two  major  reasons  help  explain  this  collapse:  Britain’s ability to resist Napoleon and the rise of nationalism.British ResistanceNapoleon  was  never  able  to  conquer  Great  Britain  because  of  its  sea  power,  which made it almost invulnerable. Napo-leon hoped to invade Britain, but the Brit-ish defeated the combined French-Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in 1805. This battle ended Napoleon’s plans for invasion. Napoleon then turned to his Continental System  to  defeat  Britain.  The  aim  of  the  Continental  System  was  to  stop  British  goods  from  reaching  the  European  conti-nent to be sold there. By weakening Britain economically, Napoleon would destroy its ability to wage war. The  Continental  System  also  failed.  Allied states resented being told by Napo-leon  that  they  could  not  trade  with  the  British.  Some  began  to  cheat.  Others  resisted. Furthermore, new markets in the Middle  East  and  in  Latin  America  gave  Britain  new  outlets  for  its  goods.  Indeed,  by  1810,  British  overseas  exports  were  at  near-record highs.

NationalismA second important factor in the defeat of Napoleon  was  nationalism.  Nationalism  is  the  sense  of  unique  identity  of  a  people  based  on  common  language,  religion,  and  national  symbols.  Nationalism  was  one  of  the  most  important  forces  of  the  nineteenth  century. A new era was born when the French people decided that they were the nation.Napoleon  marched  his  armies  through  the  Germanies,  Spain,  Italy,  and  Poland,  arousing  new  ideas  of  nationalism  in  two  ways. First, the conquered peoples became united in their hatred of the invaders. Sec-ond, the conquered peoples saw the power and  strength  of  national  feeling.  It  was  a  lesson not lost on them or their rulers.✓Reading CheckExplaining Why did being a sea power help Britain to survive an attack by the French?The Fall of NapoleonAfter major losses in Russia and Austria, Napoleon was defeated at Waterloo.HISTORY & YOU Today there are some rulers who go into exile to avoid prosecution in their homelands. Read why in 1815 the French government exiled Napoleon.Napoleon’s  downfall  began  in  1812  when he decided to invade Russia. Within only a few years, his fall was complete.Disaster in RussiaThe  Russians  had  refused  to  remain  in  the Continental System, leaving Napoleon with  little  choice  but  to  invade.  He  knew  the risks in invading such a large country, but he also knew that if he did not punish 

the  Russians  for  ignoring  the  Continental  System,  other  nations would follow suit.In  June  1812,  a  Grand  Army  of  more  than  600,000  men  entered  Russia.  Napoleon’s  hopes  depended  on  a  quick  victory  over  the  Russians.  The  Russian  forces,  however,  refused to do battle. Instead they retreated for hundreds of miles.  As  they  retreated,  they  burned  their  own  villages  and  countryside  to  keep  Napoleon’s  army  from  finding  food. When the Russians did fight at Borodino, Napoleon’s forces won an indecisive victory, which cost many lives.When  the  Grand  Army  finally  reached  Moscow,  they  found  the  city  ablaze.  Lacking  food  and  supplies  for  his  army, Napoleon abandoned the Russian capital in late Octo-ber.  As  the  winter  snows  began,  Napoleon  led  the  “Great  Retreat” west across Russia. Thousands of soldiers starved and froze along the way. Fewer than 40,000 of the original 600,000 soldiers arrived back in Poland in January 1813.This  military  disaster  led  other  European  states  to  rise  up  and  attack  the  crippled  French  army.  Paris  was  cap-tured in March 1814. Napoleon was soon sent into exile on the island of Elba, off the northwest coast of Italy. The vic-torious powers restored monarchy to France in the person of Louis XVIII, brother of the executed king, Louis XVI.The Final DefeatThe new king had little support, and the French people were not ready to surrender the glory of empire. Nor was Napoleon  ready  to  give  up.  Restless  in  exile,  he  left  the  island of Elba and slipped back into France. The new king sent troops to capture Napoleon, who opened his coat and addressed them: “Soldiers of the 5th regiment, I am your Emperor. . . . If there is a man among you [who] would kill his Emperor, here I am!”No  one  fired  a  shot.  Shouting  “Vive  l’Empereur!  Vive  l’Empereur!”—“Long  live  the  Emperor!  Long  live  the  Emperor!”—the  troops  went  over  to  his  side.  On  March  20, 1815, Napoleon entered Paris in triumph.Russia, Great Britain, Austria, and Prussia responded to Napoleon’s return. They again pledged to defeat the man they called the “Enemy and Disturber of the Tranquility of the  World.”  Meanwhile,  Napoleon  raised  another  French  army of devoted veterans who rallied from all over France. He  then  readied  an  attack  on  the  allied  troops  stationed  across the border in Belgium.At Waterloo in Belgium on June 18, 1815, Napoleon met a combined British and Prussian army under the Duke of Wellington  and  suffered  a  bloody  defeat.  This  time,  the  victorious allies exiled him to St. Helena, a small island in the south Atlantic. Napoleon remained in exile until his death in 1821, but his memory haunted French political life for many decades.


